# Hash Table
A chained hash table fundamentally consists of an array of linked lists. Each list forms a bucket in which we place all elements hashing to a specific position in the array. To insert an element, we first pass its key to a hash function in a process called hashing the key. This tells us in which bucket the element belongs. We then insert the element at the head of the appropriate list. To look up or remove an element, we hash its key again to find its bucket, then traverse the appropriate list until we find the element we are looking for. Because each bucket is a linked list, a chained hash table is not limited to a fixed number of elements. However, performance degrades if the table becomes too full.
# Symbol Tables
An important application of hash tables is the way compilers maintain information about symbols encountered in a program. Formally, a compiler translates a program written in one language, a source language such as C, into another language, which is a set of instructions for the machine on which the program will run. In order to maintain information about the symbols in a program, compilers make use of a data structure called a symbol table. Symbol tables are often implemented as hash tables because a compiler must be able to store and retrieve information about symbols very quickly.
Several parts of a compiler access the symbol table during various phases of the compilation process. One part, the lexical analyzer, inserts symbols. The lexical analyzer is the part of a compiler charged with grouping characters from the source code into meaningful strings, called lexemes. These are translated into syntactic elements, called tokens, that are passed on to the parser. The parser performs syntactical analysis. As the lexical analyzer encounters symbols in its input stream, it stores information about them into the symbol table. Two important attributes stored by the lexical analyzer are a symbol’s lexeme and the type of token the lexeme constitutes (e.g., an identifier or an operator).