# Trees
Picture a family tree, the draw sheet of a tournament, or the roots of a plant; these are all good examples of a tree’s organization as a data structure. In computing, a tree consists of elements called nodes organized in a hierarchical arrangement. The node at the top of the hierarchy is called the root. The nodes directly below the root are its children, which in turn usually have children of their own. With the exception of the root, each node in the hierarchy has exactly one parent, which is the node directly above it. The number of children a node may parent depends on the type of tree. This number is a tree’s branching factor, which dictates how fast the tree will branch out as nodes are inserted. This chapter focuses on the binary tree, a relatively simple but powerful tree with a branching factor of 2. It also explores binary search trees, binary trees organized specifically for searching.

## Some applications of trees are:
### Huffman coding
A method of data compression that uses a Huffman tree to compress a set of data (see Chapter 14, Data Compression). A Huffman tree is a binary tree that determines the best way to assign codes to symbols in the data. Symbols occurring frequently are assigned short codes, whereas symbols occurring less frequently are assigned longer ones.
### User interfaces
Examples are graphical user interfaces and interfaces to file systems. In graphical user interfaces, windows take on a hierarchical arrangement forming a tree. Every window, except the top-level window, has one parent from which it is started, and each window may have several children launched from it. Directories in hierarchical file systems have a similar organization.
### Database systems
In particular, those that require both efficient sequential and random access while performing frequent insertions and deletions. The B-tree, a tree characterized generally as a balanced search tree with a large branching factor, is especially good in this situation (see the related topics at the end of the chapter). Typically the branching factor of a B-tree is optimized so that disk I/O is minimized when accessing records in the database.